Editor's review (#2)
MaxymVlasov/maxymvlasov: articles/2023-06-15-renovate.md

## Pre-history

As you may know, Terraform 1.4.0 has introduced [changes](https://github.com/hashicorp/terraform/pull/32129), which break the previous unintentional behavior. Previously, you could ignore the lockfile and use cached providers as long as the version constraints in the code were okay with your local cache. Starting from 1.4.0, Terraform always checks the lockfile before going into your cache directory. In practice, it means that if you ignore the lockfile or remove it completely, Terraform will run full init, no matter what is in your `TF_CACHE_DIR` or the `.terraform` directory.

So, here are [a few options](https://github.com/runatlantis/atlantis/issues/3201) to solve this:

* Keep using Terraform 1.3.x as the new 0.11
* Set `TF_PLUGIN_CACHE_MAY_BREAK_DEPENDENCY_LOCK_FILE=true`
* Start using the lockfile and move on

When all hope was gone that our lovely workflow with `**/.terraform.lock.hcl` in `.gitignore` won't backfire, I chose to try to add `.terrafrom.lock.hcl` to all our 289 root modules. You may ask:

## Why are these lockfiles needed?

> Well, except "highly recommended by Hashicorp" means that they force you to use lockfiles, here are a few additional reasons why you would like to use them - Repeatability and Security.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Well, except "highly recommended by Hashicorp way", which force you to use lockfiles, here are a few additional reasons why you would like to use them - Repeatability and Security.
```

}
```

Everything works nice, until...

* Provider is going to be broken for 3 workdays, because of a lack of testing ¯\\\_(ツ)\_/¯

  ![3 days of broken Kubernetes provider](images/2023-06-15-renovate/kubernetes-provider-broken-for-3-workdays.png)

> * There is a breaking change in a minor release of the provider because they _forgot_ to make a major release

Reviewer: Nope, "forgot to make all changes in major release" not "forgot to make major release". It was intentional to release major changes as minor release

  ![AWS breaking changes on minor version](images/2023-06-15-renovate/aws-provider-breaking-changes-on-minor-version.png)

> Both of these issues happened last month.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And both of these issues happened last month.
```

}
```

Terraform uses them to pull exactly the same artifacts for your platform, as they were used during the last `terraform init` and => `terraform apply` commands.

> It decreases the probability of the [supply chain attack](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Supply_chain_attack) the weakest link in your supply chain is terraform providers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It decreases the probability of the [supply chain attack](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Supply_chain_attack) when the weakest link in your supply chain is terraform providers.
```

## Preparation for lockfiles addition

> **Note**: In all the examples below I used GitHub Workflows. Yet, you can port it to any other CI.

First of all, you need to have a valid terraform configuration.

> No, you cannot skip this step if you have a huge terraform codebase: almost certainly there is something broken.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And no, you can't just skip this step if you have a huge terraform codebase: almost certainly there is something broken.
```

          #   exclude: '(\.)?modules/'
    ```

3. If you have huge repo - uncomment this line and specify the correct `# files: '^path/to/your/terraform/root/folder/[a-c]'`  

>     `files` and `exclude` uses a Python `re.search` regex ([docs](https://pre-commit.com/#regular-expressions)). By specifying `[a-c]` at the end, one can limit the number of directories that should be processed by a single run

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    `files` and `exclude` uses a Python `re.search` regex ([docs](https://pre-commit.com/#regular-expressions)). By specifying `[a-c]` at the end, we can limit the number of directories that should be processed by a single run
```

          )
    ```

>     > **Note**: To save some time, you may need to comment out the last hook section for future lockfile generation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    > **Note**: To save some time, you may need to comment out the last hook section for future lockfiles generation.
```

              )
    ```

> 2. Add a GitHub workflow, which installs all the dependencies and run `pre-commit run` every morning. It creates a new PR in the Renovate style:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Add a GitHub workflow, which installs all the dependencies and run `pre-commit run` every Monday. It creates a new PR in the Renovate style:
```

    ![Autoupdate PR for lockfiles](images/2023-06-15-renovate/lockfile-autoupdate-pr.png)

    For 289 root modules with 1180 lockfile provider definitions, it takes 2h 40min or ~2,288s per platform per provider, which is ~0.2s faster than running it locally.

Well, that's it from the technical perspective. It's time to deal with the questions like: _Why don't you just use Renovate for this, dude?_

### Why not Renovate?

Yes, I heard about Renovate and dependabot. Check out, my talks about Renovate at [Anton Babenko stream](https://www.youtube.com/live/l28pukLJvss?feature=share) and [HUG Kyiv](https://www.youtube.com/live/uK8QgE17dzg?feature=share&t=3012)(Ukr).

We don't use dependabot for the infrastructure repository because it has too many problems with monorepos, you can't simply [force `dependabot.yml` for the whole organization](https://heyko.medium.com/automated-dependabot-configuration-in-github-bb08e2c6eeeb), it is less configurable than Renovate, etc.

<details><summary>GitHub itself does not use dependabot properly in its repositories...</summary>

> * Newly generated repository [actions/typescript-action](https://github.com/actions/typescript-action) contains

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Newly generated repository from [actions/typescript-action](https://github.com/actions/typescript-action) contains
```

    ![Newly generated repo dependabot PR](images/2023-06-15-renovate/newly-generated-repo.jpg)

* Dependabot PR is there for 2 weeks!

    ![How long can a dependabot PR live without any attention?](images/2023-06-15-renovate/github-dependabot-alert-long-live.png)

</details>

I maintain Renovate for my organization here: [Sharable Config Presets for Renovatebot, especially useful for DevOps folks](https://github.com/SpotOnInc/renovate-config/). Also, Renovate has a [`lockFileMaintenance`](https://docs.renovatebot.com/configuration-options/#lockfilemaintenance) option but...

> * For now, Renovate cannot resolve [`!=`](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/language/expressions/version-constraints#version-constraint-syntax) version constrain ([renovate/#22417](https://github.com/renovatebot/renovate/issues/22417)), so it just fails to create a PR if at least one `!=` exists in a repository.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* For now, Renovate cannot resolve [`!=`](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/language/expressions/version-constraints#version-constraint-syntax) version constrain ([renovate/#22417](https://github.com/renovatebot/renovate/issues/22417)), so it just fails to create a PR if at least one version constraint with `!=` exists in a repository.
```

        #   )
```

And automate `pre-commit` executions in PRs like [this](https://github.com/antonbabenko/pre-commit-terraform/blob/32597545e7fff922a19c3b3c7cecf3fd6bc6b628/.github/workflows/pre-commit.yaml) or [this](https://github.com/SpotOnInc/renovate-config/blob/dfcbbf82cecc20e6d759c058399fdfda3956c62f/.github/workflows/pre-commit.yaml).

## Summary

Here are a few takeaways:

* It's better to have lockifles than have no (repeatability, security)
* It makes sense to automate all these updates and maintain the same versions across the codebase, and be on the cutting edge without bleeding ([Renovate](https://github.com/renovatebot/renovate), [dependabot](https://github.com/dependabot/dependabot-core), [tfupdate via pre-commit](https://github.com/antonbabenko/pre-commit-terraform/#tfupdate))

> * For a better user experience, you need a source of truth (automated `terraform plan` in CI/Terratest, etc.) which shows that changes do not break anything. It can be [Atlantis](https://github.com/runatlantis/atlantis), [Spacelift](https://spacelift.io/), [Terraform Cloud](https://www.hashicorp.com/products/terraform), or you can do it in your own CI.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* For a better user experience, you need a source of truth (automated `terraform plan` in CI, Terratests, etc.) which shows that changes do not break anything. It can be [Atlantis](https://github.com/runatlantis/atlantis), [Spacelift](https://spacelift.io/), [Terraform Cloud](https://www.hashicorp.com/products/terraform), or you can do it in your own CI.
```
